Second part of integration tests tutorial: UI (#1432)
JetBrains/intellij-sdk-docs: topics/basics/testing_plugins/integration_tests/integration_tests_ui.md

     myaction="Select Run/Debug Configuration (null)"
     tool_tip_text_key="ToolTipText"
     visible="true" visible_text="Current File" visible_text_keys=""/>
```

There are other attributes which are omitted for clarity.

The element corresponds to the following button:

![](integration_tests_ui_sample.png){width=706}

Similar to web testing frameworks like Selenium, XPath is used to locate components.
The Driver framework provides a simple XPath builder.
Here are several ways to find the same component:

```kotlin
xQuery { byVisibleText("Current File") }
xQuery { byAccessibleName("Current File") }
xQuery { byType("com.intellij.execution.ui.RedesignedRunConfigurationSelector\$createCustomComponent$1") }
```

For reliable component identification, prioritize these attributes: `accessiblename`, `visible_text`, `icon`, `javaclass`.
Multiple attributes can be combined for a more precise selection.

## Interaction with Components

Once a component is located, it's possible to interact with it or verify its properties.

To click the _Current File_ button:

```kotlin
x(xQuery { byVisibleText("Current File") }).click()
```

> The `x()` call creates a lazy reference to the component.

Author: It's a shorthand I believe for `findOne` and `xx` for `findMany`. I actually though that is taken from some common Web UI frameworks by Artamonov and Nizienko but it looks I am mistaken. Anyway I don't think we will rename the methods in the nearest future since they don't cause confusion at least no one asked about them in comparision to some other our method names:)

<!-- Copyright 2000-2025 JetBrains s.r.o. and contributors. Use of this source code is governed by the Apache 2.0 license. -->

# Integration Tests: UI Testing

<link-summary>Walkthrough how to interact with UI in integration tests.</link-summary>

> This page is part of [](integration_tests.md) tutorial.

> For introduction and setting up dependencies please refer to [](integration_tests_intro.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For introduction and setting up dependencies, refer to [](integration_tests_intro.md).
```

## UI Hierarchy

IntelliJ-based IDEs primarily use Swing and AWT for their user interface, while [JCEF](embedded_browser_jcef.md) is used in specific cases like Markdown rendering.
These UI frameworks organize elements in a parent-child hierarchy, similar to HTML's DOM structure:

* Top-level containers (IDE frame and dialogs).
* Nested containers.
* Individual components (buttons, text fields, and lists).

Every UI element (except top-level containers) must have a parent container, creating a clear hierarchical structure.

The Driver framework provides a Kotlin DSL that mirrors this hierarchy.
Here's an example:

```kotlin
ideFrame {
  invokeAction("SearchEverywhere")
  searchEverywherePopup {
    actionButtonByXpath(xQuery { byAccessibleName("Preview")}).click()
  }
}
```

This code demonstrates hierarchical navigation:

* Find the main IDE window (`ideFrame`).
* Trigger the _Search Everywhere_ action (`invokeAction("SearchEverywhere")`).
* Locate the <control>Search Everywhere</control> popup (`searchEverywherePopup`).
* Find and click the <control>Preview</control> button within the popup (`actionButtonByXpath(xQuery { byAccessibleName("Preview")}).click()`).

> The code could be written more concise:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code could be more concise:
```

or:
`The code could be written more concisely:`
but I think the first one reads better.

```kotlin
ideFrame {
  actionButtonByXpath(xQuery { byAccessibleName("Preview")}).click()
}
```

But the shorter code has two significant drawbacks:

* **Reduced precision**: The code searches for the <control>Preview</control> button throughout the entire IDE frame.
  It might find unintended matches in the project explorer, tool windows, or other UI elements.
  This can make tests unreliable and prone to breaking when the UI content changes.
* **Decreased readability**: While the code is more concise, it doesn't communicate the intended navigation path.
  The longer version makes it clear exactly where it's expected to find the Preview button, making the code more maintainable and easier to debug.

So, being explicit about the component hierarchy helps create more robust and maintainable UI automation code.

## Searching Components

While the Driver framework provides many pre-built components (like `ideFrame`, `codeEditor`, `button`, `tree`, etc.), sometimes it's required to locate custom elements.

> One way to pause the IDE to examine its UI structure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It can be done by pausing the IDE to examine its UI structure:
```

"One way" sounds like there is another described, but there are no other ways mentioned.

> ```kotlin
> .runIdeWithDriver().useDriverAndCloseIde {
>   Thread.sleep(30.minutes.inWholeMilliseconds)
> }
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```kotlin
Starter.newContext(...).apply { ... }
  .runIdeWithDriver().useDriverAndCloseIde {
    Thread.sleep(30.minutes.inWholeMilliseconds) // pause the IDE
  }
```
````
With a dot at the beginning, it is a bit confusing and looks incorrect, IMHO.

When the test is running, the following line will appear in the logs: `http://localhost:63343/api/remote-driver/`.
Opening this URL reveals an HTML representation of the IDE's Swing component tree:

![](integration_tests_devtools.png){width=706}

Using Developer Tools in the browser, it's possible to inspect detailed component attributes.
Here's an example component:

```html

<div accessiblename="Current File"
     asstring="<result of calling toString on component>"
     class="ActionButtonWithText"
     enabled="true" hide_dropdown_icon="HIDE_DROPDOWN_ICON"
     javaclass="com.intellij.execution.ui.RedesignedRunConfigurationSelector$createCustomComponent$1"
     myaction="Select Run/Debug Configuration (null)"
     tool_tip_text_key="ToolTipText"
     visible="true" visible_text="Current File" visible_text_keys=""/>
```

There are other attributes which are omitted for clarity.

The element corresponds to the following button:

![](integration_tests_ui_sample.png){width=706}

> Similar to web testing frameworks like Selenium, XPath is used to locate components.
> The Driver framework provides a simple XPath builder.
> Here are several ways to find the same component:
> 
> ```kotlin
> xQuery { byVisibleText("Current File") }
> xQuery { byAccessibleName("Current File") }
> xQuery { byType("com.intellij.execution.ui.RedesignedRunConfigurationSelector\$createCustomComponent$1") }
> ```
> 
> For reliable component identification, prioritize these attributes: `accessiblename`, `visible_text`, `icon`, `javaclass`.
> Multiple attributes can be combined for a more precise selection.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
Similar to web testing frameworks like Selenium, XPath is used to locate components.
The Driver framework provides a simple XPath builder.

For reliable component identification, prioritize these attributes, which can be found with predefined functions:

- `accessiblename` (function: `byAccessibleName()`)
- `visible_text` (function: `byVisibleText()`)
- `icon` (function: `???()`)
- `javaclass` (function: `???()`)

A single component can be found in several ways:

```kotlin
xQuery { byVisibleText("Current File") }
xQuery { byAccessibleName("Current File") }
xQuery { byType("com.intellij.execution.ui.RedesignedRunConfigurationSelector\$createCustomComponent$1") }
```

Multiple attributes can be combined for a more precise selection, for example:
```kotlin
TODO: show an example
```
````

I would reorder content here, so the prioritized attributes go first, then some details.
Please also add an example for combining multiple attributes.

Author: I've adjusted the section according to the comments.

## Interaction with Components

Once a component is located, it's possible to interact with it or verify its properties.

To click the <control>Current File</control> button:

```kotlin
x(xQuery { byVisibleText("Current File") }).click()
```

The `x()` call creates a lazy reference to the component.
It means that the XPath query isn't executed immediately and component lookup happens only when an action (like `click()`) is invoked.

Here's a part of test that incorporates UI interaction:
```kotlin
runIdeWithDriver().useDriverAndCloseIde {
  waitForIndicators(1.minutes)
  ideFrame {
    x(xQuery { byVisibleText("Current File") }).click()
  }
}
```

Beyond mouse clicks, keyboard input and shortcuts can be simulated:

```kotlin

> keyboard {

Reviewer: Can we extend this example so readers can understand how to use `keyboard` and type in a component? It is unclear to me how to do it. Is there a component focus request needed first?

Author: I've added a general information about the focus and the recommended way to do this.

  enterText("Sample text")
  enter()
  hotKey(if (SystemInfo.isMac) KeyEvent.VK_META else KeyEvent.VK_CONTROL, KeyEvent.VK_A)
  backspace()
}
```

> On macOS, the interaction via `java.awt.Robot` requires special permissions.
> IntelliJ IDEA should be granted the necessary permissions via the Accessibility page, which can be found under _System Settings | Privacy & Security_.
>
{style="note"}

## Asserting Properties

The complete UI test:

> ```kotlin
> @Test
> fun simpleTestForCustomUIElement() {
>   Starter.newContext(
>     "testExample",
>     TestCase(
>     IdeProductProvider.IC,
>     GitHubProject.fromGithub(branchName = "master",
>       repoRelativeUrl = "JetBrains/ij-perf-report-aggregator"))
>       .withVersion("2024.3")
>     ).apply {
>   val pathToPlugin = System.getProperty("path.to.build.plugin")
>   PluginConfigurator(this).installPluginFromFolder(File(pathToPlugin))
>   }.runIdeWithDriver().useDriverAndCloseIde {
>       waitForIndicators(1.minutes)
>       ideFrame {
>       x(xQuery { byVisibleText("Current File") }).click()
>       val configurations = popup().jBlist(xQuery { contains(byVisibleText("Edit Configurations")) })
>       configurations.shouldBe("Configuration list is not present", present)
>       Assertions.assertTrue(configurations.rawItems.contains("backup-data"),
>         "Configurations list doesn't contain 'backup-data' item: ${configurations.rawItems}")
>     }
>   }
> }
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```kotlin
@Test
fun simpleTestForCustomUIElement() {
  Starter.newContext(
    "testExample",
    TestCase(
    IdeProductProvider.IC,
    GitHubProject.fromGithub(branchName = "master",
      repoRelativeUrl = "JetBrains/ij-perf-report-aggregator"))
      .withVersion("2024.3")
  )
    .apply {
      val pathToPlugin = System.getProperty("path.to.build.plugin")
      PluginConfigurator(this).installPluginFromFolder(File(pathToPlugin))
    }.runIdeWithDriver().useDriverAndCloseIde {
      waitForIndicators(1.minutes)
      ideFrame {
        x(xQuery { byVisibleText("Current File") }).click()
        val configurations = popup().jBlist(
          xQuery { contains(byVisibleText("Edit Configurations")) }
        )
        configurations.shouldBe("Configuration list is not present", present)
        Assertions.assertTrue(configurations.rawItems.contains("backup-data"),
          "Configurations list doesn't contain 'backup-data' item: ${configurations.rawItems}")
    }
  }
}
```
````

I improved formatting.

The test does the following:

> * Opening the popup

Reviewer: Looking at the test, clicking the button is first, so I don't understand what popup is opened in the the beggining.

I think it would be better to add `// 1`, `// 2`, etc. comment in the code snippet and reference them below with a numbered list.
